We sincerely congratulate Dr. B on having completed a task that was perhaps never before accomplished
by a single individual, namely a corrected Hebrew text of the Old Testament and a revised
English version of the whole Bible.
Benjamin Boothroyd was born in 1768 to a humble shoemaker.
He lived his whole life in Yorkshire, England.
Boothroyd wasn't wealthy or prominent, yet he accomplished something remarkable in the field
of Bible translation.
As a young man, Boothroyd and his friends would attend church and then go to a local
ale house, not dissimilar to this one.
It was on one of these occasions the Boothroyd experienced something that changed his life.
The conversation was unusually profane and simple in which I joined and was perhaps worse
than any of my companions.
With a suddenness of almost a flash of lightning, my mind was struck with horror under a sense
of my sin and guilt that I was a suitable victim for the miseries of hell.
Without saying a word, Boothroyd left the ale house and his companions behind.
As he walked home, he got down on his knees and begged God to have mercy on him.
It was a pivotal moment.
He resolved to dedicate the rest of his life to God.
We're here at the National Library of Wales to reveal the next chapter of Boothroyd's
story.
In 1801, Boothroyd married Sarah Hurst who shared his devotion and faith.
To supplement their income, a couple ran a small bookshop and printery.
It was there, Boothroyd acquired these books.
Lectures on the sacred poetry of the Hebrews.
Those lectures on the Hebrew poetry fell into my hands.
I read it with peculiar pleasure.
Boothroyd fell in love with the Hebrew language.
He decided to learn it, but how?
He noticed that some of the Psalms were split into standards using different Hebrew letters.
The names of the letters I learned from the 119th Psalm and I began to read the early part
of the Pentateuch.
He painstakingly taught himself Hebrew letters, then words, then grammar, until he could
read the Bible in Hebrew.
Uncomparing the latest Hebrew printed texts, such as these by Benjamin Kennycott, with
older available manuscripts, Boothroyd discovered something troubling.
It had many errors.
This led him to a monumental decision.
Boothroyd began a project to compile and publish a more accurate Hebrew text of the
Old Testament.
While he did the majority of the work, he wasn't alone.
My wife learned the names of the Hebrew letters, and we examined the sheets, not by uttering
words, but by pronouncing letter by letter.
Sarah helped her husband proofread the work to confirm the accuracy.
After years of meticulous work, they completed Boothroyd's Bibliah Brecher in two
volumes in 1816.
Many would consider such an accomplishment to be the achievement of a lifetime.
But Boothroyd was about to begin another major undertaking.
Boothroyd felt it was his duty to produce a revised Bible in plain English, a Bible that
anyone could understand.
So with the knowledge, materials, and means available to him, he went back to work.
We're now at the University in Lampeter to find out what Boothroyd accomplished.
Just two years later, in 1818, he published the first volume of a new family Bible.
The second volume was completed in 1821, and by 1824, the entire English translation
was released.
Once again, he hadn't accomplished this on his own.
Through the whole of this important and laborious work, Mrs. Boothroyd was my chief support
and assistant, and to her, the public are as much indebted as myself.
A new family Bible was appreciated by scholars and faithful Bible readers alike.
One thing in particular made Boothroyd's Bible especially significant.
Boothroyd followed this rule while translating.
I have adopted Jehovah instead of Lord, and Jehovah God is certainly more proper and
just to the original than Lord God.
This was the first English Bible ever published to consistently use Jehovah in the Old Testament.
A Boothroyd also included it several times in the New Testament.
The University of Glasgow awarded Boothroyd a degree in recognition of this outstanding
piece of scholarship.
His new family Bible was later used as the basis for translating the Bible into languages
of the South Pacific, such as Tahisha.
As a result, these two used Jehovah's name extensively.
Even what was available to him, Boothroyd peered into the Scriptures, seeking to know
their meaning, and then worked to share that knowledge with others.
In his dedication to his new family Bible, he wrote,
I have no interest to serve, but that of truth.
This man of lowly origins achieved something truly rare.
This works gave people knowledge of God's word, God's will, and God's name.